# run

Generate a stage file
([DVC-file](https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format)) from a given
command and execute the command.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc run [-h] [-q | -v] [-d DEPS] [-o OUTS]
               [-O OUTS_NO_CACHE] [-M METRICS_NO_CACHE]
               [-m METRICS] [-f FILE] [-w WDIR]
               [--no-exec] [-y] [--overwrite-dvcfile]
               [--ignore-build-cache] [--remove-outs]
               [--no-commit]
               command

positional arguments:
  command               Command to execute.
```

## Description

`dvc run` provides an interface to build a computational graph (aka pipeline).
It's a way to describe commands, data inputs and intermediate results that went
into a model (or other data results). By explicitly specifying a list of
dependencies (with `-d` option) and outputs (with `-o`, `-O`, or `-M` options)
DVC can connect individual stages (commands) into a directed acyclic graph
(DAG). `dvc repro` provides an interface to check state and reproduce this graph
later. This concept is similar to the one of the `Makefile` but DVC captures
data and caches data artifacts along the way. Check this
[example](/doc/get-started/example-pipeline) to learn more and try to build a
pipeline.

Unless the `-f` options is used, by default the DVC-file name generated is
`<file>.dvc`, where `<file>` is file name of the first output (`-o`, `-O`, or
`-M` option). If neither `-f`, nor outputs are specified, the stage name
defaults to `Dvcfile`.

Since `dvc run` provides a way to build a graph of computations, using
dependencies and outputs to connect different stages it checks computational
graph integrity properties before creating a new stage. For example, for every
output there should be only one stage that explicitly specifies it. There should
be no cycles, etc.

## Options

- `-d`, `--deps` - specify a file or a directory the stage depends on. Multiple
  dependencies can be specified like this: `-d data.csv -d process.py`. Usually,
  each dependency is a file or a directory with data, or a code file, or a
  configuration file. DVC also supports certain
  [external dependencies](/doc/user-guide/external-dependencies)

  DVC builds a computation graph and this list of dependencies is a way to
  connect different stages with each other. When you run `dvc repro` to
  reproduce a stage (or when a stage is reproduced due to recursive dependency),
  the list of dependencies helps DVC analyze whether any dependencies have
  changed and thus running the stage again is required. A special case is when
  no dependencies are specified.

  > Note that a DVC-file without dependencies is considered always _changed_, so
  > `dvc repro` always executes it.

- `-o`, `--outs` - specify a file or a directory that are results of running the
  command. Multiple outputs can be specified like this:
  `-o model.pkl -o output.log`. DVC is building a computation graph and this
  list of outputs (along with dependencies described above) is a way to connect
  different stages with each other. DVC takes all output files and directories
  under its control and will put them into the cache (this is similar to what's
  happening when you run `dvc add`).

- `-O`, `--outs-no-cache` - the same as `-o` except outputs are not put
  automatically under DVC control. It means that they are not cached, and it's
  up to a user to save and version control them. Usually, it's useful if outputs
  are small enough to be put into Git or other underlying version control
  system, or these files are not of any interest and there is no requirement to
  save and share them.

- `-m`, `--metrics` - another kind of output files. It is usually a small human
  readable file (JSON, CSV, text, whatnot) with some numbers or other
  information that describes a model or other outputs. Check `dvc metrics` to
  learn more about tracking metrics and comparing them across different model or
  experiment versions.

- `-M`, `--metrics-no-cache` - the same as `-m` except files are not put
  automatically under DVC control. It means that they are not cached, and it's
  up to a user to save and version control them. In case of metrics it's pretty
  usual because metric files are small enough to be put into Git or other
  underlying version control system. See also the difference between `-o` and
  `-O` options.

- `-f`, `--file` - specify stage file name. By default the DVC-file name
  generated is `<file>.dvc`, where `<file>` is file name of the first output
  (`-o`, `-O`, or `-M` option). The stage file is placed in the same directory
  where `dvc run` is run by default, but `-f` can be used to change this
  location, by including a path in the provided value (e.g.
  `-f stages/stage.dvc`).

- `-c`, `--cwd` - deprecated, use `-f` and `-w` to change location and working
  directory of a stage file.

- `-w`, `--wdir` - specifies a working directory for the `command` to run it in.
  `dvc run` expects that dependencies, outputs, metric files are specified
  relative to this directory. This value is saved in the `wdir` field of the
  stage file generated (as a relative path to the location of the DVC-file) and
  is used by `dvc repro` to change the working directory before running the
  command.

- `--no-exec` - create a stage file, but do not run the command specified and do
  not take dependencies or outputs under DVC control. In the DVC-file contents,
  the `md5` hash sums will be empty; They will be populated the next time this
  stage is actually executed. This command is useful, if for example, you need
  to build a pipeline (computational graph) first, and then run it all at once.

- `-y`, `--yes` - deprecated, use `--overwrite-dvcfile` instead.

- `--overwrite-dvcfile` - overwrite an existing DVC-file (the same file name
  which is determined by the logic described in the `-f` option) without asking
  for confirmation.

- `--ignore-build-cache` - if an exactly equal DVC-file exists (same list of
  outputs and inputs, the same command to run) which has been already executed,
  and is up to date, with option `dvc run` won't execute the command again by
  default (thus "build cache"). This option gives a way to forcefully run the
  command anyway. It's useful if the command is considered non-deterministic for
  some reason (meaning it produces different outputs from the same list of
  inputs).

- `--remove-outs` - it removes stage outputs before running the command. If
  `--no-exec` specified outputs are removed anyway. This option is enabled by
  default and deprecated. See `dvc remove` as well for more details.

- `--no-commit` - doesn't save outputs to cache. Useful when running different
  experiments and you don't want to fill up your cache with temporary files. Use
  `dvc commit` when you are ready to save your results to cache.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - does not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if
  no problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

- A trivial example to play with, try different set of options to see how they
  work. You don't need any actual data or scripts to play with this example:

  ```dvc
  $ mkdir example
  $ cd example
  $ git init
  $ dvc init
  $ mkdir data
  $ dvc run -d data -o metric -f metric.dvc "echo '1' >> metric"

  Running command:
    echo 'a' >> metric
  Adding 'metric' to '.gitignore'.
  Saving 'metric' to cache '.dvc/cache'.
  Saving information to 'metric.dvc'.

  To track the changes with git run:

    git add .gitignore metric.dvc
  ```

> See [DVC-File Format](/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format) for more details on the
> text format above.

- Execute a Python script as a DVC pipeline stage. The stage file name is not
  specified, so a `model.p.dvc` DVC-file is created:

  ```dvc
  # Train ML model on the training dataset. 20180226 is a seed value.
  $ dvc run -d matrix-train.p -d train_model.py \
            -o model.p \
            python train_model.py matrix-train.p 20180226 model.p
  ```

- Execute an R script as s DVC pipeline stage:

  ```dvc
  $ dvc run -d parsingxml.R -d Posts.xml \
            -o Posts.csv \
            Rscript parsingxml.R Posts.xml Posts.csv
  ```

- Extract an XML file from an archive to the `data/` folder:

  ```dvc
  $ mkdir data
  $ dvc run -d Posts.xml.zip \
            -o data/Posts.xml \
            -f extract.dvc \
            unzip Posts.xml.zip -d data/
  ```

- Place the generated stage file (DVC-file) into a subdirectory:

  ```dvc
  $ dvc run -d test.txt -f stages/test.dvc -o result.out \
    "cat test.txt | wc -l > result.out"

  $ tree .

  .
  ├── result.out
  ├── stages
  │   └── test.dvc
  └── test.txt
  ```
