---
title: Join DVC for Google Season of Docs 2020
date: 2020-04-30
description: |
  A call for writer applications for Google Season of Docs 2020.
descriptionLong: |
  DVC is looking for writers to take part in
  [Google Season of Code 2020](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs).
picture: 2020-04-30/Season_of_Docs_small.png
pictureComment:
author: jorge_orpinel
commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/join-dvc-for-google-season-of-docs/317
tags:
  - Google Season of Docs
  - Technical Writers
  - Documentation
  - Mentoring
  - Writers
---

Exciting announcement! After a successful experience with
[Google Season of Docs](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs) 2019,
we're putting out a call for writers to apply to work with DVC as part of the
[2020 edition](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs). If you want to get
involved with open source software documentation with mentorship from our team,
read on.

## Prerequisites to apply

Besides the general requirements to apply to Google Season of Docs, there are a
few skills we look for in applicants.

1. **Clear English writing.** We strive express the concepts, processes, and
   details around DVC clearly, correctly, and completely. We use general and
   friendly wording as much as possible and pay close attention to consistency
   in our terminology.

1. **Command line experience.** DVC is a command line tool that builds on top of
   [Git](https://git-scm.com/), so being able to play with it and test the
   features will be very useful. Creating and managing files, GNU/Linux
   commands, file and permission admin are desired skills.

1. **People skills.** We put a high value on communication: the ability to
   discuss ideas, explain your goals, report progress, and work kindly with more
   or less technical teammates.

If you like our mission but aren't sure if you're sufficiently prepared, please
be in touch anyway. We'd love to hear from you.

## Project ideas

Below are several project ideas that are an immediate priority for the DVC docs
team. Of course, we welcome writers to create their own proposals, even if they
differ from our ideas. Projects will be primarily mentored by our in-house
technical writer, [Jorge Orpinel](https://github.com/jorgeorpinel).

1. **One.** Our organization is a co-maintainer of the PyDrive library in
   collaboration with a team at Google.. Because PyDrive is broadly used outside
   of DVC, this project is a chance to work on a library of widespread interest
   to the Python community.

   _Skills required:_ Python, Git, experience with APIs <br/> _Difficulty
   rating:_ Beginner-Medium<br/><br/>

1. **Two.** One of DVC’s features is the ability to create pipelines, linking
   data repositories with code to process data, train models, and evaluate model
   metrics... Furthermore, we’ll need to support building flags into DVC
   commands that specify the level of parallelization (CPU, GPU or memory).

   _Skills required:_ Python, Git. Some experience with parallelization and/or
   scientific computing would be helpful but not required. <<br/> _Difficulty
   rating:_ Advanced<br/><br/>

1. **Three.** A new DVC functionality that we’re particularly excited about is
   `summon`, a method that can turn remotely-hosted machine learning artifacts
   such as datasets, trained models, and more into objects in the user’s local
   environment (such as a Jupyter notebook)... We’re looking for students to
   explore other possible use cases.

   _Skills required:_ Python, Git, and some machine learning or data science
   experience <br/> _Difficulty rating:_ Beginner-Medium

## If you'd like to apply

Please refer to the
[Google Season of Docs](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs)
application guides for specifics of the program. Writers looking to know more
about DVC, and our worldwide community of contributors, will learn most by
visiting our [Discord chat](https://dvc.org/chat),
[GitHub repository](https://github.com/iterative/dvc), and
[Forum](https://discuss.dvc.org/). We are available to discuss project proposals
from interested writers and can be reached by [email](mailto:support@dvc.org) or
on Discord.
