---
title: Join DVC for Google Summer of Code 2020
date: 2020-02-04
description: |
  A call for student applications for Google Summer of Code 2020.
descriptionLong: |
  DVC is looking for students to take part in
  [Google Summer of Code 2020](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/).
picture: 2020-02-04/Summer_of_Code_small.png
pictureComment:
author: elle_obrien
commentsUrl: https://discuss.dvc.org/t/join-dvc-for-google-summer-of-code/317
tags:
  - Google Summer of Code
  - Students
  - Mentoring
---

Announcement, announcement! After a successful experience with
[Google Season of Docs](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs) in 2019,
we're putting out a call for students to apply to work with DVC as part of
[Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/). If you want to
make a dent in open source software development with mentorship from our team,
read on.

## Prerequisites to apply

Besides the general requirements to apply to Google Summer of Code, there are a
few skills we look for in applicants.

1. **Python experience.** All of our core development is done in Python, so we
   prefer candidates that are experienced in Python. However, we will consider
   applicants who are very strong in another language and familiar with Python
   basics.
2. **Git experience.** Git is also a key part of DVC development, as DVC is
   built around Git; that said, for certain projects (rated as “Beginner”) a
   surface-level knowledge of Git will be sufficient.
3. **People skills.** Beyond technical fundamentals, we put a high value on
   communication skills: the ability to report and document your experiments and
   findings, to work kindly with teammates, and explain your goals and work
   clearly.

If you like our mission but aren't sure if you're sufficiently prepared, please
be in touch anyway. We'd love to hear from you.

## Project ideas

Below are several project ideas that are an immediate priority for the core DVC
team. Of course,we welcome students to create their own proposals, even if they
differ from our ideas. Projets will be primarily mentored by co-founders
[Dmitry Petrov](https://github.com/dmpetrov) and
[Ivan Shcheklein](https://github.com/shcheklein).

1. **Migrate to the latest v3 API to improve Google Drive support.** Our
   organization is a co-maintainer of the PyDrive library in collaboration with
   a team at Google. The PyDrive library is now several years old and still
   relies on the v2 protocol. We would like to migrate to v3, which we expect
   will boost performance for many DVC use cases (e.g. the ability to filter
   fields being retrieved from our API, etc). For this project, we’re looking
   for a student to work with us to prepare the next major version of the
   PyDrive library, as well as making important changes to the core DVC code to
   support it. Because PyDrive is broadly used outside of DVC, this project is a
   chance to work on a library of widespread interest to the Python community.
   <br /> <br /> _Skills required:_ Python, Git, experience with APIs <br />
   _Difficulty rating:_ Beginner-Medium <br />

2. **Introducing parallelism to DVC.** One of DVC’s features is the ability to
   create pipelines, linking data repositories with code to process data, train
   models, and evaluate model metrics. Once a DVC pipeline is created, the
   pipeline can be shared and re-run in a systematic and entirely reproducible
   way. Currently, DVC executes pipelines sequentially, even though some steps
   may be run in parallel (such as data preprocessing). We would like to support
   parallelization for pipeline steps specified by the user. Furthermore, we’ll
   need to support building flags into DVC commands that specify the level of
   parallelization (CPU, GPU or memory). <br /> <br /> _Skills required:_
   Python, Git. Some experience with parallelization and/or scientific computing
   would be helpful but not required. <br /> _Difficulty rating:_ Advanced
   <br />

3. **Developing use cases for data registries and ML model zoos.** A new DVC
   functionality that we’re particularly excited about is `summon`, a method
   that can turn remotely-hosted machine learning artifacts such as datasets,
   trained models, and more into objects in the user’s local environment (such
   as a Jupyter notebook). This is a foundation for creating data catalogs of
   data-frames and machine learning model zoos on top of Git repositories and
   cloud storages (like GCS or S3). We need to identify and implement model zoos
   (think PyTorch Hub, the Caffe Model Zoo, or the TensorFlow DeepLab Model Zoo)
   and data registries for types that are not supported by DVC yet. Currently,
   we’ve tested `summon` with PyTorch image segmentation models and Pandas
   dataframes. We’re looking for students to explore other possible use cases.
   <br /> <br /> _Skills required:_ Python, Git, and some machine learning or
   data science experience <br /> _Difficulty rating:_ Beginner-Medium <br />

4. **Continuous delivery for JetBrains TeamCity.** Continuous integration and
   continuous delivery (CI/CD) for ML projects is an area where we see
   [DVC make a big impact](https://martinfowler.com/articles/cd4ml.html)-
   specifically, by delivering datasets and ML models into CI/CD pipelines.
   While there are many cases when DVC is used inside GitHub Actions and GitLab
   CI, you will be transferring this experience to another type of CI/CD system,
   [JetBrains TeamCity](https://www.jetbrains.com/teamcity/). We're working to
   integrate DVC's model and dataset versioning into TeamCity's CI/CD toolkit.
   This project would be ideal for a student looking to explore the growing
   field of MLOps, an offshoot of DevOps with the specifics of ML projects at
   the center. <br /> <br /> _Skills required:_ Python, Git, bash scripting. It
   would be nice, but not necessary, to have some experience with CI/CD tools
   and developer workflow automation. <br /> _Difficulty rating:_
   Medium-Advanced <br />

5. **DVC performance testing framework.** Performance is a core value of DVC. We
   will be creating a performance monitoring and testing framework where new
   scenarios (e.g., unit testing)can be populated. The framework should reflect
   all performance improvements and degradations for each of the DVC releases.
   It would be especially compelling if testing could be integrated with our
   GitHub workflow (CI/CD). This is a great opportunity for a student to learn
   about DVC and versioning in-depth and contribute to its stability. <br />
   <br /> _Skills required:_ Python, Git, bash scripting. <br /> _Difficulty
   rating:_ Medium-Advanced <br />

## If you'd like to apply

Please refer to the
[Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/) application guides
for specifics of the program. Students looking to know more about DVC, and our
worldwide community of contributors, will learn most by visiting our
[Discord channel](https://dvc.org/chat),
[GitHub repository](https://github.com/iterative/dvc), and
[Forum](https://discuss.dvc.org/). We are available to discuss project proposals
from interested students and can be reached by [email](mailto:support@dvc.org)
or on our Discord channel.
