# metrics show

Find and print [project metrics](/doc/command-reference/metrics), with optional
formatting.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc metrics show [-h] [-q | -v] [-t TYPE] [-x XPATH] [-a] [-T] [-R]
                        [targets [targets ...]]

positional arguments:
  targets               Metric files or directories (see -R) to show (leave
                        empty to display all)
```

## Description

Finds and prints all metrics in the <abbr>project</abbr> by examining all of its
[DVC-files](/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format). If `targets` are provided, it will
show those specific metric files instead. With the `-a` or`-T` options, this
command shows the different metrics values across all Git branches or tags,
respectively.

The optional `targets` argument can contain several metric files. With the `-R`
option, a target can even be a directory, so that DVC recursively shows all
metric files in it.

Providing a `type` (`-t` option) overwrites the full metric specification (both
`type` and `xpath` fields) defined in the
[DVC-file](/doc/user-guide/dvc-file-format) (usually set originally with the
`dvc metrics modify` command).

If `type` (via `-t`) is not specified and only `xpath` (`-x` option) is, only
the `xpath` field is overwritten in its DVC-file. (DVC will first try to read
`type` from the DVC-file, but it can be automatically detected by the file
extension.)

> Alternatively, see `dvc metrics modify` command to learn how to apply `-t` and
> `-x` permanently.

## Options

- `-t`, `--type` - specify a type of the metric file. Accepted values are:
  `raw`, `json`, `tsv`, `htsv`, `csv`, `hcsv`. It will be saved into the
  corresponding DVC-file, and used by `dvc metrics show` to determine how to
  handle displaying metrics.

  `raw` is the default when no type is provided. It means that no additional
  parsing is applied, and `--xpath` is ignored. `htsv`/`hcsv` are the same as
  `tsv`/`csv`, but the values in the first row of the file will be used as the
  field names and should be used to address columns in the `--xpath` option.

  This option along with `--xpath` below takes precedence over the `type` and
  `xpath` specified in the corresponding DVC file. If this parameter is not
  given, the type can be detected by the file extension automatically if the
  type is supported. If any other value is specified, it is ignored and
  defaulted back to `raw`.

- `-x`, `--xpath` - specify a path within a metric file to get a specific metric
  value. Should be used if the metric file contains multiple numbers and you
  need to get a only one of them. Only a single path is allowed. It will be
  saved into the corresponding DVC-file, and used by `dvc metrics show` to
  determine how to handle displaying metrics. The accepted value depends on the
  metric file type (`--type` option):

  - For `json` - see [JSONPath spec](https://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/) or
    [jsonpath-ng](https://github.com/h2non/jsonpath-ng) for available options.
    For example, `"AUC"` extracts the value from the following JSON-formatted
    metric file: `{"AUC": "0.624652"}`. You can also filter on certain values,
    for example `"$.metrics[?(@.deviation_mse<0.30) & (@.value_mse>0.4)]"`
    extracts only the values for model versions if they meet the given
    conditions from the metric file:
    `{"metrics": [{"dataset": "train", "deviation_mse": 0.173461, "value_mse": 0.421601}]}`
  - For `tsv`/`csv` - `row,column` e.g. `1,2`. Indices are 0-based.
  - For `htsv`/`hcsv` - `row,column name` e.g. `0,Name`. Row index is 0-based.
    First row is used to specify column names and is not included into index.

  If multiple metric files exist in the <abbr>project</abbr>, the same parser
  and path will be applied to all of them. If `xpath` for a particular metric
  has been set using `dvc metrics modify`, the path passed with this option will
  overwrite it for the current command run only â€“ It may fail to produce any
  results or parse files that are not in a corresponding format in this case.

- `-a`, `--all-branches` - get and print metric file contents across all Git
  branches. It can be used to compare different experiments.

- `-T`, `--all-tags` - get and print metric file contents across all Git tags.
  Similar to `-a` above. Note that both options can be combined, for example
  using the `-aT` flag.

- `-R`, `--recursive` - `targets` is expected to contain one or more directories
  for this option to have effect. Determines the metric files to show by
  searching each target directory and its subdirectories for DVC-files to
  inspect.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

Examples in [add](/doc/command-reference/metrics/add),
[modify](/doc/command-reference/metrics/modify), and
[remove](/doc/command-reference/metrics/remove) cover most of the basic cases
for the `dvc metrics show`.

The [Compare Experiments](/doc/get-started/compare-experiments) chapter of our
_Get Started_ section covers the `-a` option to collect and print a metric file
value across all Git branches.
