# Fast and Secure Data Caching Hub

Datasets used in data science tend to exceed typical storage and networking
capacities. Storage needs to expand rapidly as more people acquire the same
data, creating duplication (increasing cost). Valuable time is wasted waiting
for downloads in each environment.

![](/img/dataset-copies.png) _Users wait for repeated transfers and produce
multiple data copies locally._

DVC's built-in data <abbr>caching</abbr> lets you implement a simple and
efficient storage layer globally -- for your entire team. This approach can help
to

- speed up data transfers from massive object stores on the cloud, or share data
  across multiple machines without slowing things down.

- pay only for fast access to frequently-used data (upgrading your entire
  storage platform is expensive).

- avoid downloading data again and duplicating files when multiple people are
  working on the same data (for example on a
  [shared development server](#example-shared-development-server)).

- switch data inputs quickly (without re-downloading) on a shared server used
  for machine learning [experiments](/doc/user-guide/experiment-management).

![](/img/storage-layers.png) _Data storage middleware for multiple projects_

You can have a single storage for all you projects by setting up a [shared DVC
cache] in a near location (network, external drive, etc.). This de-duplicates
files across datasets and prevents repetitive transfers by
[linking](/doc/user-guide/data-management/large-dataset-optimization) your
working files and directories. Data security policies can be implemented
reliably, as data never leaves the central storage. DVC can also help you back
up and [share data and ML models] on external/remote locations.

Now that your team shares a primary storage, it can be managed independently as
part of your infrastructure; provisioned depending on data access speed and cost
requirements. You have the flexibility to switch storage providers at any time,
without having to change the directory structures or code of your projects.

[share data and ml models]:
  /doc/start/data-management/data-versioning#storing-and-sharing

### What's next?

For details about how DVC caches your files and directories, see [Structure of
the cache directory]. If you're completely new to DVC, see our
[Get Started](/doc/start) pages to get familiar with the main features that
structured storage and
[data versioning](/doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-models) allow. And check
out the following example for a specific solution provided by a layered storage
architecture.

[structure of the cache directory]:
  /doc/user-guide/project-structure/internal-files#structure-of-the-cache-directory

## Example: Shared development server

Some teams prefer using a single shared machine to run their experiments. This
is a simple way to improve resource utilization (quick transfers, central
storage, GPU access, etc.). Everyone can still work in a separate
<abbr>workspace</abbr> (e.g. in their user home folders).

![](/img/shared-server.png) _Data storage shared by DVC projects_

Start by configuring a [shared DVC cache]. Now when colleagues make changes to
the project, you can get the latest results with `dvc checkout`. DVC links data
files and directories to your workspace instantly, so data artifacts are never
moved or copied.

[shared dvc cache]: /doc/user-guide/how-to/share-a-dvc-cache

```cli
$ git pull
$ dvc checkout
A       data/new
M       data/labels
```
