# add

Track data files or directories with DVC, by creating a corresponding `.dvc`
file.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc add [-h] [-q | -v] [-R] [--no-commit] [--external]
               [--glob] [--file <filename>] [-o <path>] [--to-remote]
               [-r <name>] [-j <number>] [--desc <text>]
               targets [targets ...]

positional arguments:
  targets               Files or directories to add
```

## Description

The `dvc add` command is analogous to `git add`, in that it makes DVC aware of
the target data, in order to start versioning it. It creates a `.dvc` file to
track the added data.

This command can be used to track large files, models, dataset directories, etc.
that are too big for Git to handle directly. This enables
[versioning](/doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files) them indirectly
with Git.

The `targets` are the files or [directories](#adding-entire-directories) to add.
They get stored in the <abbr>cache</abbr> by default (use the `--no-commit`
option to avoid this, and `dvc commit` to finish the process when needed).

> See also `dvc.yaml` and `dvc stage add` for more advanced ways to track and
> version intermediate and final results (like ML models).

After checking that each `target` hasn't been added before (or tracked with
other DVC commands), a few actions are taken under the hood:

1. Calculate the file hash.
2. Move the file contents to the cache (by default in `.dvc/cache`) (or to
   remote storage if `--to-remote` is given), using the file hash to form the
   cached file path. (See
   [Structure of cache directory](/doc/user-guide/project-structure/internal-files#structure-of-the-cache-directory)
   for more details.)
3. Attempt to replace the file with a link to the cached data (more details on
   file linking further down). Skipped if `--to-remote` is used.
4. Create a corresponding `.dvc` file to track the file, using its path and hash
   to identify the cached data (with `--to-remote`/`-o`, an external path is
   moved to the <abbr>workspace</abbr>). The `.dvc` file lists the DVC-tracked
   file as an <abbr>output</abbr> (`outs` field). Unless the `--file` option is
   used, the `.dvc` file name generated by default is `<file>.dvc`, where
   `<file>` is the file name of the first target.
5. Add the `targets` to `.gitignore` in order to prevent them from being
   committed to the Git repository (unless `dvc init --no-scm` was used when
   initializing the <abbr>DVC project</abbr>).
6. Instructions are printed showing `git` commands for staging `.dvc` files (or
   they are staged automatically if
   [`core.autostage`](/doc/command-reference/config#core) is set).

Summarizing, the result is that the target data is replaced by small `.dvc`
files that can be easily tracked with Git.

It's possible to prevent files or directories from being added by DVC by
entering the corresponding patterns in a `.dvcignore` file.

You can also [undo `dvc add`](/doc/user-guide/how-to/stop-tracking-data) to stop
tracking files or directories.

By default, DVC tries to use reflinks (see
[File link types](/doc/user-guide/large-dataset-optimization#file-link-types-for-the-dvc-cache)
to avoid copying any file contents and to optimize `.dvc` file operations for
large files. DVC also supports other link types for use on file systems without
`reflink` support, but they have to be specified manually. Refer to the
`cache.type` config option in `dvc config cache` for more information.

### Adding entire directories

A `dvc add` target can be either a file or a directory. In the latter case, a
`.dvc` file is created for the top of the hierarchy (with default name
`<dir_name>.dvc`).

Every file in the dir is cached normally (unless the `--no-commit` option is
used), but DVC does not produce individual `.dvc` files for each one. Instead,
the single `.dvc` file references a special JSON file in the cache (with `.dir`
extension), that in turn points to the added files.

> Refer to
> [Structure of cache directory](/doc/user-guide/project-structure/internal-files#structure-of-the-cache-directory)
> for more info. on `.dir` cache entries.

Note that DVC commands that use tracked data support granular targeting of files
and directories, even when contained in a parent directory added as a whole.
Examples: `dvc push`, `dvc pull`, `dvc get`, `dvc import`, etc.

As a rarely needed alternative, the `--recursive` option causes every file in
the hierarchy to be added individually. A corresponding `.dvc` file will be
generated for each file in he same location. This may be helpful to save time
adding several data files grouped in a structural directory, but it's
undesirable for data directories with a large number of files.

To avoid adding files inside a directory accidentally, you can add the
corresponding patterns to `.dvcignore`.

### Adding symlink targets {#add-symlink}

`dvc add` supports symlinked files as `targets`. But if a target path is a
directory symlink, or if it contains any intermediate directory symlinks, it
cannot be added to DVC.

For example, given the following project structure:

```
.
├── .dvc
├── dir
│   └── file
├── link_to_dir -> dir
├── link_to_external_dir -> /path/to/dir
├── link_to_external_file -> /path/to/file
└── link_to_file -> dir/file
```

`link_to_file` and `link_to_external_file` are both valid symlink targets to
`dvc add`. But `link_to_dir`, `link_to_external_dir`, and `link_to_dir/file` are
not.

## Options

- `-R`, `--recursive` - determines the files to add by searching each target
  directory and its subdirectories for data files. If there are no directories
  among the `targets`, this option has no effect. For each file found, a new
  `.dvc` file is created using the process outlined in this command's
  description.

- `--no-commit` - do not store `targets` in the cache (the `.dvc` file is still
  created). Use `dvc commit` to finish the operation (similar to `git commit`
  after `git add`).

- `--file <filename>` - specify name of the `.dvc` file it generates. This
  option works only if there is a single target. By default the name of the
  generated `.dvc` file is `<target>.dvc`, where `<target>` is the file name of
  the given target. This option allows to set the name and the path of the
  generated `.dvc` file.

- `--glob` - allows adding files and directories that match the
  [pattern](https://docs.python.org/3/library/glob.html) specified in `targets`.
  Shell style wildcards supported: `*`, `?`, `[seq]`, `[!seq]`, and `**`

- `--external` - allow tracking `targets` outside of the DVC repository
  in-place. See
  [Managing External Data](/doc/user-guide/managing-external-data).

  > ⚠️ Note that this is an advanced feature for very specific situations and
  > not recommended except if there's absolutely no other alternative.
  > Additionally, this typically requires an external cache setup (see link
  > above).

- `-o <path>`, `--out <path>` - specify a `path` to the desired location in the
  workspace to place the `targets` (copying them from their current location).
  This enables targeting data outside the project (see an
  [example](#example-transfer-to-an-external-cache)).

- `--to-remote` - add a target that's outside the project, but neither cache it
  nor place it in the workspace nor cache it yet.
  [Transfer it](#example-transfer-to-remote-storage) directly to remote storage
  instead (the default one unless one is specified with `-r`). Implies
  `--out .`. Use `dvc pull` to get the data locally.

- `-r <name>`, `--remote <name>` - name of the
  [remote storage](/doc/command-reference/remote) to transfer external target to
  (can only be used with `--to-remote`).

- `-j <number>`, `--jobs <number>` - parallelism level for DVC to transfer data
  when using `--to-remote`. The default value is `4 \* cpu_count()`. For SSH
  remotes, the default is `4`. Using more jobs may speed up the operation.

- `--desc <text>` - user description of the data (optional). This doesn't affect
  any DVC operations.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Example: Single file

Track a file with DVC:

```dvc
$ dvc add data.xml
```

As indicated above, a `.dvc` file has been created for `data.xml`. Let's explore
the result:

```dvc
$ tree
.
├── data.xml
└── data.xml.dvc
```

Let's check the `data.xml.dvc` file inside:

```yaml
outs:
  - md5: 6137cde4893c59f76f005a8123d8e8e6
    path: data.xml
```

This is a standard `.dvc` file with only one output (`outs` field). The hash
value (`md5` field) corresponds to a file path in the <abbr>cache</abbr>.

```dvc
$ file .dvc/cache/d8/acabbfd4ee51c95da5d7628c7ef74b
.dvc/cache/61/37cde4893c59f76f005a8123d8e8e6: ASCII text
```

⚠️ Tracking compressed files (e.g. ZIP or TAR archives) is not recommended, as
`dvc add` supports tracking directories (details below).

## Example: Directory

Let's suppose your goal is to build an algorithm to identify cats and dogs in
pictures. You may then have hundreds or thousands of pictures of these animals
in a directory, and this is your training dataset:

```dvc
$ tree pics --filelimit 3
pics
├── train
│   ├── cats [many image files]
│   └── dogs [many image files]
└── validation
    ├── cats [more image files]
    └── dogs [more image files]
```

[Tracking a directory](#tracking-directories) with DVC as simple as with a
single file:

```dvc
$ dvc add pics
```

There are no `.dvc` files generated within this directory structure to match
each image, but the image files are all <abbr>cached</abbr>. A single `pics.dvc`
file is generated for the top-level directory, and it contains:

```yaml
outs:
  - md5: ce57450aa92ab8f2b957c24b0df73edc.dir
    path: pics
```

> Refer to [Adding entire directories](#adding-entire-directories) for more
> info.

This allows us to treat the entire directory structure as a single data
artifact. For example, you can pass it as a <abbr>dependency</abbr> to a stage
definition:

```dvc
$ dvc stage add -n train \
                -d train.py -d pics \
                -M metrics.json -o model.h5 \
                python train.py
```

> To try this example, see the
> [versioning tutorial](/doc/use-cases/versioning-data-and-model-files/tutorial).

If instead we use the `--recursive` (`-R`) option, the output looks like this:

```dvc
$ dvc add -R pics
```

In this case, a `.dvc` file is generated for each file in the `pics/` directory
tree:

```dvc
$ tree pics
pics
├── train
|   ├── cats
|   |   ├── img1.jpg
|   |   ├── img1.jpg.dvc
|   |   ├── img2.jpg
|   |   ├── img2.jpg.dvc
|   |   ├── ...
|   └── dogs
|       ├── img1.jpg
|       ├── img1.jpg.dvc
|       ...
```

Note that no top-level `.dvc` file is generated, which is typically less
convenient. For example, we cannot use the directory structure as one unit with
`dvc stage add` or other commands.

## Example .dvcignore

Let's take an example to illustrate how `.dvcignore` interacts with `dvc add`.

```dvc
$ mkdir dir
$ echo file_one > dir/file1
$ echo file_two > dir/file2
```

Now add `file1` to `.dvcignore` and track the entire `dir` directory with
`dvc add`.

```dvc
$ echo dir/file1 > .dvcignore
$ dvc add dir
```

Let's now modify `file1` (which is listed in `.dvcignore`) and run `dvc status`:

```dvc
$ echo file_one_changed > dir/file1
$ dvc status
Data and pipelines are up to date.
```

`dvc status` ignores changes to files listed in `.dvcignore`.

Let's have a look at cache directory:

```dvc
$ tree .dvc/cache
.dvc/cache
├── 0a
│   └── ec3a687bd65c3e6a13e3cf20f3a6b2.dir
└── 52
    └── 4bcc8502a70ac49bf441db350eafc2
```

Only the hash values of the `dir/` directory (with `.dir` file extension) and
`file2` have been cached.

## Example: Transfer to an external cache

When you want to add a large dataset that is outside of your
<abbr>project</abbr> (e.g. online), you would normally need to download or copy
it into the <abbr>workspace</abbr> first. But you may not have enough local
storage space.

You can however set up an [external cache] that can handle the data. To avoid
ever making a local copy, target the outside data with `dvc add` while
specifying an `--out` (`-o`) path inside of your project. This way the data will
be transferred to the <abbr>cache</abbr> directly, and then [linked] into your
workspace.

Let's add a `data.xml` file via HTTP, putting it in `./data.xml`:

```dvc
$ dvc add https://data.dvc.org/get-started/data.xml -o data.xml
...
$ ls
data.xml data.xml.dvc
```

The resulting `.dvc` file will save the provided local `path` as if the data was
already in the workspace, while the `md5` hash points to the copy of the data
that has now been transferred to the <abbr>cache</abbr>. Let's check the
contents of `data.xml.dvc` in this case:

```yaml
outs:
  - md5: a304afb96060aad90176268345e10355
    nfiles: 1
    path: data.xml
```

[linked]:
  /doc/user-guide/large-dataset-optimization#file-link-types-for-the-dvc-cache
[external cache]:
  /doc/user-guide/managing-external-data#setting-up-an-external-cache

## Example: Transfer to remote storage

Sometimes there's not enough space in the local environment to import a large
dataset, but you still want to track it in the <abbr>project</abbr> so it can be
[pulled](/doc/command-reference/plots) later.

As long as you have setup [remote storage] that can handle the data, this can be
achieved with the `--to-remote` flag. It creates a `.dvc` file without
downloading anything, transferring a target directly to a DVC remote instead:

Let's add a `data.xml` file via HTTP straight to remote:

```dvc
$ dvc add https://data.dvc.org/get-started/data.xml --to-remote
...
$ ls
data.xml.dvc
```

Since a `.dvc` file is created in the <abbr>workspace</abbr>, whenever anyone
wants to actually download the data they can use `dvc pull`:

```dvc
$ dvc pull data.xml.dvc
A       data.xml
1 file added
```

> Note that you can also do this [with `dvc import-url`][iutr]. This has the
> added benefit of keeping a connection to the data source so it can be updated
> later (with `dvc update`).

[remote storage]: /doc/command-reference/remote
[iutr]: /doc/command-reference/import-url#example-transfer-to-remote-storage
