# unfreeze

Unfreeze [stages](/doc/command-reference/run) so that `dvc repro` can execute
them. See `dvc freeze` for more information.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc unfreeze [-h] [-q | -v] targets [targets ...]

positional arguments:
  targets        Stages or .dvc files to unfreeze
```

## Description

There are several ways that tracked data files can be frozen, `dvc freeze` being
one of them. Frozen stages are considered _not changed_ by `dvc status` and
`dvc repro`.

If `dvc unfreeze` is used on frozen stages, they will start being checked again
by `dvc status`, and regenerated by `dvc repro`.

Note that <abbr>import stages</abbr> are frozen by default. Use `dvc update` to
update the imported data from the external data source.
[Unfreeze](/doc/command-reference/unfreeze) them before using `dvc repro` on a
pipeline that needs their outputs.

## Options

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples

First, let's create a dummy stage that copies `foo` to `bar`:

```dvc
$ echo foo > foo
$ dvc add foo
$ dvc run -n make_copy -d foo -o bar cp foo bar
```

> See `dvc run` for more details.

Then, let's change the file `foo` that the stage `make_copy` depends on, and
freeze the stage as well, to see what's the project status after that:

```dvc
$ echo zoo > foo
$ dvc freeze make_copy
$ dvc status
foo.dvc:
	changed outs:
		modified:           foo
```

DVC notices that `foo` changed due to the `foo.dvc` file that tracks this file
(as `outs`), but the `make_copy` stage doesn't record the change among its
dependencies. Run `dvc unfreeze` to get the regular/full project status:

```dvc
$ dvc unfreeze make_copy
$ dvc status
make_copy:
	changed deps:
		modified:           foo
foo.dvc:
	changed outs:
		modified:           foo
```
