<admon>

**We have renamed Views to Projects in Iterative Studio.**

</admon>

# Account Management

To manage your user account, click on your user icon on the top right corner of
Iterative Studio, and go to your `Profile`. This page has multiple sections
which are described below.

<admon>

This does not include managing your team plan (Free, Basic, or Enterprise). Team
plans are defined for each team separately. To manage them, go to the [team
settings] page and scroll to the `Plan and billing` section. You can change
plans there and increase or decrease the number of seats in it.

[team settings]: /doc/studio/user-guide/teams#settings

</admon>

## Profile

Here, you can see your name and profile picture. If you signed up with a
GitHub.com, GitLab.com or Bitbucket.org account, these details are fetched from
your connected Git hosting account.

You can edit your name.

## Account

Here, you can see your username, password and email addresses. If you signed up
with a GitHub.com, GitLab.com or Bitbucket.org account, the username and email
address are fetched from your connected Git hosting account.

You can update your username and password.

**Managing email addresses:**

You can add multiple email addresses to a single Iterative Studio account. You
can login to the account with any of your verified email addresses as long as
you have set up a password for your account. This is true even if you signed up
using your GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket.

One of your email addresses must be designated as primary. This is the address
to which Iterative Studio will send all your account notification emails.

You can change your primary email address by clicking on the `Primary` button
next to the email address which you want to designate as primary.

You can delete your non-primary email addresses.

## Git integrations

In this section, you can,

- Connect to GitHub.com, GitLab.com or Bitbucket.org.

  When you connect to a Git hosting provider, you will be prompted to grant
  Iterative Studio access to your account.

  If you signed up to use Iterative Studio with an email address, you will not
  have any Git connections by default. You can set them up in this section.

  To connect to your GitHub repositories, you must install the Iterative Studio
  GitHub app. Refer to the section on
  [GitHub app installation](/doc/studio/user-guide/install-github-app) for more
  details.

  Note that **connections to self-hosted GitLab servers** are not managed in
  this section. If you want to connect to a self-hosted GitLab server, you
  should create a team and
  [set up the GitLab server connection](/doc/studio/user-guide/connect-custom-gitlab-server)
  in the [team settings].

- Disconnect from your GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket accounts.
- Configure your GitHub account connection. That is, install the Iterative
  Studio GitHub app on additional organizations or repositories, or even remove
  the app from organizations or repositories where you no longer need it.

## Cloud credentials

Here, you can see all the credentials you have added for your cloud / data
remotes. You can also add new credentials as well as edit or delete existing
credentials. The credentials that you add here will become available to use with
your projects in Iterative Studio.

## Delete account

You can delete your account. However, this will permanently delete all the
projects you own and the links that you have shared. So, click on
`Delete my account` only if you are absolutely sure that you do not need those
projects or links anymore.

<admon>

Deleting your account in Iterative Studio does not delete your Git repositories.

</admon>
