# `.dvc` files

When you add a file or directory with `dvc add`, `dvc import`, or
`dvc import-url`, a file ending with the `.dvc` extension ("dot DVC file") is
created based on the data file name (e.g. `data.xml.dvc`). It contain the
information needed to track the data with DVC.

They use a simple [YAML](https://yaml.org/) format, meant to be easy to read,
edit, or even created manually. Here is an example:

```yaml
outs:
  - md5: a304afb96060aad90176268345e10355
    path: data.xml
    desc: Cats and dogs dataset

# Comments and user metadata are supported.
meta:
  name: 'John Doe'
  email: john@doe.com
```

## Accepted fields

`.dvc` files can contain the following fields:

- `outs` (always present): List of [output entries](#output-entries) (details
  below) that represent the files or directories tracked with DVC. Typically
  there is only one (but several can be added or combined manually).
- `deps`: List of [dependency entries](#dependency-entries) (details below).
  Only present when `dvc import` or `dvc import-url` are used to generate this
  `.dvc` file. Typically there is only one (but several can be added manually).
- `wdir`: Working directory for the `outs` and `deps` paths (relative to the
  `.dvc` file's location). It defaults to `.` (the file's location).
- `md5`: (only for <abbr>imports</abbr>) MD5 hash of the import `.dvc` file
  itself.
- `meta` (optional): Arbitrary metadata can be added manually with this field.
  Any YAML contents is supported. `meta` contents are ignored by DVC, but they
  can be meaningful for user processes that read `.dvc` files.

Note that comments can be added to `.dvc` files using the `# comment` format.
`meta` fields and `#` comments are preserved among executions of the `dvc repro`
and `dvc commit` commands, but not when a `.dvc` file is overwritten by
`dvc add`, `dvc move`, `dvc import`, or `dvc import-url`.

### Output entries

`outs` fields can contain these subfields:

- `path`: Path to the file or directory (relative to `wdir`, which defaults to
  the file's location)
- `md5`, `etag`, or `checksum`: Hash value for the file or directory being
  tracked with DVC. MD5 is used for most locations (local file system and SSH);
  [ETag](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_ETag#Strong_and_weak_validation) for
  HTTP, S3, or Azure [external outputs](/doc/user-guide/managing-external-data);
  and a special _checksum_ for HDFS and WebHDFS.
- `size`: Size of the file or directory (sum of all files).
- `nfiles`: If this output is a directory, the number of files inside
  (recursive).
- `isexec`: Whether this is an executable file. DVC preserves execute
  permissions upon `dvc checkout` and `dvc pull`. This has no effect on
  directories, or in general on Windows.
- `cache`: Whether or not this file or directory is <abbr>cached</abbr> (`true`
  by default). See the `--no-commit` option of `dvc add`.
- `persist`: Whether the output file/dir should remain in place while
  `dvc repro` runs (`false` by default: outputs are deleted when `dvc repro`
  starts
- `desc` (optional): User description for this output. This doesn't affect any
  DVC operations.

### Dependency entries

`deps` fields can contain these subfields:

- `path`: Path to the dependency (relative to `wdir`, which defaults to the
  file's location)
- `md5`, `etag`, or `checksum`: Hash value for the file or directory being
  tracked with DVC. MD5 is used for most locations (local file system and SSH);
  [ETag](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_ETag#Strong_and_weak_validation) for
  HTTP, S3, or Azure <abbr>external dependencies</abbr>; and a special
  _checksum_ for HDFS and WebHDFS. See `dvc import-url` for more information.
- `size`: Size of the file or directory (sum of all files).
- `nfiles`: If this dependency is a directory, the number of files inside
  (recursive).
- `repo`: This entry is only for external dependencies created with
  `dvc import`, and can contains the following fields:

  - `url`: URL of Git repository with source DVC project
  - `rev`: Only present when the `--rev` option of `dvc import` is used.
    Specific commit hash, branch or tag name, etc. (a
    [Git revision](https://git-scm.com/docs/revisions)) used to import the
    dependency from.
  - `rev_lock`: Git commit hash of the external <abbr>DVC repository</abbr> at
    the time of importing or updating the dependency (with `dvc update`)
