# `dvc.yaml` file

`dvc.yaml` files describe data science or machine learning pipelines (similar to
how [Makefiles](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Introduction)
work for building software). Its YAML structure contains a list of stages which
can be written manually or generated by user code.

> A helper command, `dvc run`, is also available to add or update stages in
> `dvc.yaml`. Additionally, a `dvc.lock` file is also created or updated by
> `dvc run` and `dvc repro`, to record the pipelines' state.

Here's a comprehensive `dvc.yaml` example:

```yaml
stages:
  features:
    cmd: jupyter nbconvert --execute featurize.ipynb
    deps:
      - data/clean
    params:
      - levels.no
    outs:
      - features
    metrics:
      - performance.json
  training:
    desc: Train model with Python
    cmd:
      - pip install -r requirements.txt
      - python train.py --out ${model_file}
    deps:
      - requirements.txt
      - train.py
      - features
    outs:
      - ${model_file}:
          desc: My model description
    plots:
      - logs.csv:
          x: epoch
          x_label: Epoch
    meta: 'For deployment'
    # User metadata and comments are supported.
```

💡 Keep in mind that there may be multiple `dvc.yaml` files in each <abbr>DVC
project</abbr>. All of them are checked for consistency during operations that
require rebuilding [DAGs](/doc/command-reference/dag) (like `dvc repro`).

## Accepted fields

`dvc.yaml` files consists of a set of `stages` with names provided by the user
(for example with the `--name` option of `dvc run`). Each stage entry can
contain the following fields:

- `cmd` (always present): One or more commands executed by the stage (may
  contain either a single value, or a list). Commands are executed sequentially
  until all are finished or until one of them fails (see `dvc repro` for
  details).
- `wdir`: Working directory for the stage command to run in (relative to the
  file's location). Any paths in other fields are also based on this. It
  defaults to `.` (the file's location).
- `deps`: List of <abbr>dependency</abbr> file or directory paths of this stage
  (relative to `wdir`).
- `params`: List of <abbr>parameter</abbr> dependency keys (field names) to
  track from `params.yaml` (in `wdir`). The list may also contain other YAML,
  JSON, TOML, or Python file names, with a sub-list of the param names to track
  in them.
- `outs`: List of <abbr>output</abbr> file or directory paths of this stage
  (relative to `wdir`). See [Output entries](#output-entries) for more details.
- `metrics`: List of [metrics files](/doc/command-reference/metrics), and
  optionally, whether or not this metrics file is <abbr>cached</abbr> (`true` by
  default). See the `--metrics-no-cache` (`-M`) option of `dvc run`.
- `plots`: List of [plot metrics](/doc/command-reference/plots), and optionally,
  their default configuration (subfields matching the options of
  `dvc plots modify`), and whether or not this plots file is <abbr>cached</abbr>
  ( `true` by default). See the `--plots-no-cache` option of `dvc run`.
- `frozen`: Whether or not this stage is frozen from reproduction
- `always_changed`: Whether or not this stage is considered as changed by
  commands such as `dvc status` and `dvc repro`. `false` by default
- `meta` (optional): Arbitrary metadata can be added manually with this field.
  Any YAML contents is supported. `meta` contents are ignored by DVC, but they
  can be meaningful for user processes that read or write `.dvc` files directly.
- `desc` (optional): User description for this stage. This doesn't affect any
  DVC operations.

See [Advanced dvc.yaml Usage](/doc/user-guide/dvc-files/advanced-dvc.yaml) for
info on the `${}` syntax, as well as `foreach`/`do` fields.

`dvc.yaml` files also support `# comments`.

Note that we maintain a `dvc.yaml`
[schema](https://github.com/iterative/dvcyaml-schema) that can be used by
editors like [VSCode](/doc/install/plugins#visual-studio-code) or
[PyCharm](/doc/install/plugins#pycharmintellij) to enable automatic syntax
validation and auto-completion.

### Output entries

`outs` fields can contain these subfields:

- `cache`: Whether or not this file or directory is <abbr>cached</abbr> (`true`
  by default). See the `--no-commit` option of `dvc add`.
- `persist`: Whether the output file/dir should remain in place while
  `dvc repro` runs (`false` by default: outputs are deleted when `dvc repro`
  starts
- `desc` (optional): User description for this output. This doesn't affect any
  DVC operations.
