# `dvc.yaml` file

`dvc.yaml` files describe data science or machine learning pipelines (similar to
how [Makefiles](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Introduction)
work for building software). Its YAML structure contains a list of stages which
can be written manually or generated by user code.

> A helper command, `dvc run`, is also available to add or update stages in
> `dvc.yaml`. Additionally, a `dvc.lock` file is also created or updated by
> `dvc run` and `dvc repro` to record the pipelines' state.

Here's a comprehensive `dvc.yaml` example:

```yaml
stages:
  features:
    cmd: jupyter nbconvert --execute featurize.ipynb
    deps:
      - data/clean
    params:
      - levels.no
    outs:
      - features
    metrics:
      - performance.json
  training:
    desc: Train model with Python
    cmd:
      - pip install -r requirements.txt
      - python train.py --out ${model_file}
    deps:
      - requirements.txt
      - train.py
      - features
    outs:
      - ${model_file}:
          desc: My model description
    plots:
      - logs.csv:
          x: epoch
          x_label: Epoch
    meta: 'For deployment'
    # User metadata and comments are supported.
```

💡 You can
[parameterize this file](/doc/user-guide/dvc-files/advanced-dvc.yaml#templating-dvcyaml)
with the special expression `${}`, external params files, and/or internal lists
of `vars`.

`dvc.yaml` files consists of a set of `stages` with names provided explicitly by
the user with the `--name` (`-n`) option of `dvc run`. Each stage can contain
the following fields:

- `cmd` (always present): One or more commands executed by the stage (may
  contain either a single value, or a list). Commands are executed sequentially
  until all are finished or until one of them fails (see `dvc repro` for
  details).
- `wdir`: Working directory for the stage command to run in (relative to the
  file's location). Any paths in other fields are also based on this. It
  defaults to `.` (the file's location).
- `deps`: List of <abbr>dependency</abbr> file or directory paths of this stage
  (relative to `wdir`).
- `params`: List of <abbr>parameter</abbr> dependency keys (field names) to
  track from `params.yaml` (in `wdir`). The list may also contain other YAML,
  JSON, TOML, or Python file names, with a sub-list of the param names to track
  in them.
- `outs`: List of <abbr>output</abbr> file or directory paths of this stage
  (relative to `wdir`). See [Output entries](#output-entries) for more details.
- `metrics`: List of [metrics files](/doc/command-reference/metrics), and
  optionally, whether or not this metrics file is <abbr>cached</abbr> (`true` by
  default). See the `--metrics-no-cache` (`-M`) option of `dvc run`.
- `plots`: List of [plot metrics](/doc/command-reference/plots), and optionally,
  their default configuration (subfields matching the options of
  `dvc plots modify`), and whether or not this plots file is <abbr>cached</abbr>
  ( `true` by default). See the `--plots-no-cache` option of `dvc run`.
- `frozen`: Whether or not this stage is frozen from reproduction
- `always_changed`: Whether or not this stage is considered as changed by
  commands such as `dvc status` and `dvc repro`. `false` by default
- `meta` (optional): Arbitrary metadata can be added manually with this field.
  Any YAML contents is supported. `meta` contents are ignored by DVC, but they
  can be meaningful for user processes that read or write `.dvc` files directly.
- `desc` (optional): User description for this stage. This doesn't affect any
  DVC operations.

💡 You can also
[define multiple stages](/doc/user-guide/dvc-files/advanced-dvc.yaml#generating-multiple-stages-at-once)
in a single entry using `foreach`/`do` syntax.

`dvc.yaml` files also support `# comments`.

💡 Keep in mind that there may be more than one `dvc.yaml` files in each
<abbr>DVC project</abbr>. DVC checks all of them for consistency during
operations that require rebuilding DAGs (like `dvc dag`).

Note that we maintain a `dvc.yaml`
[schema](https://github.com/iterative/dvcyaml-schema) that can be used by
editors like [VSCode](/doc/install/plugins#visual-studio-code) or
[PyCharm](/doc/install/plugins#pycharmintellij) to enable automatic syntax
validation and auto-completion.

## Output entries

`outs` fields can contain these subfields:

- `cache`: Whether or not this file or directory is <abbr>cached</abbr> (`true`
  by default). See the `--no-commit` option of `dvc add`.
- `persist`: Whether the output file/dir should remain in place while
  `dvc repro` runs (`false` by default: outputs are deleted when `dvc repro`
  starts
- `desc` (optional): User description for this output. This doesn't affect any
  DVC operations.

## `dvc.lock` file

For every `dvc.yaml` file, a matching `dvc.lock` (YAML) file usually exists.
It's created or updated by DVC commands such as `dvc run` and `dvc repro`.
`dvc.lock` describes the latest pipeline state. It has several purposes:

- Tracking of intermediate and final <abbr>outputs</abbr> of a pipeline —
  similar to [`.dvc` files](#dvc-files).
- Allow DVC to detect when stage definitions, or their dependencies have
  changed. Such conditions invalidate stages, requiring their reproduction (see
  `dvc status`, `dvc repro`).
- `dvc.lock` is needed internally for several DVC commands to operate, such as
  `dvc checkout`, `dvc get`, and `dvc import`.

Here's an example `dvc.lock` (based on the `dvc.yaml` example above):

```yaml
stages:
  features:
    cmd: jupyter nbconvert --execute featurize.ipynb
    deps:
      - path: data/clean
        md5: d8b874c5fa18c32b2d67f73606a1be60
    params:
      params.yaml:
        levels.no: 5
    outs:
      - path: features
        md5: 2119f7661d49546288b73b5730d76485
      - path: performance.json
        md5: ea46c1139d771bfeba7942d1fbb5981e
      - path: logs.csv
        md5: f99aac37e383b422adc76f5f1fb45004
```

Stage commands are listed again in `dvc.lock`, in order to know when their
definitions change in `dvc.yaml`.

Regular <abbr>dependencies</abbr> and all kinds of <abbr>outputs</abbr>
(including [metrics](/doc/command-reference/metrics) and
[plots](/doc/command-reference/plots) files) are also listed (per stage) in
`dvc.lock`, but with an additional field with a hash of their last known
contents. Specifically: `md5`, `etag`, or `checksum` are used (same as in `deps`
and `outs` entries of `.dvc` files).

Full <abbr>parameter dependencies</abbr> (key and value) are listed too (under
`params`), grouped by parameters file. And in the case of
[templated `dvc.yaml`](/doc/user-guide/dvc-files/advanced-dvc.yaml) files, their
actual values are substituted into the `dvc.lock` YAML structure.
