# dvclive.init()

Initializes a DVCLive logger.

```py
def init(
    path: str = None,
    resume: bool = False,
    step: int = 0,
    summary: bool = True,
    html: bool = True,
)
```

#### Usage:

```py
import dvclive

dvclive.init()
```

## Description

It's usage is optional and focused on configuring the behavior of subsequent
calls to [`dvclive.log`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/log) and
[`dvclive.next_step`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/next_step).

⚠️ If `path` already exists when this functions is called, it's contents will be
removed.

## Parameters

- `path` (`dvclive` by default) - The _metrics logs_ (generated by
  [`dvclive.log`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/log) and usable by `dvc plots`)
  will be saved in separated `.tsv` files under `path` and the _metrics summary_
  (generated by [`dvclive.next_step`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/next_step) and
  usable by `dvc metrics`) will be saved in a single `{path}.json` file.

- `step` (`0` by default) - the `step` values in _metrics logs_ files will start
  incrementing from this value. Check
  [`dvclive.log` description](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/log#description) for
  more details.

- `resume` - (`False` by default) - if `True`, DVCLive will try to read the
  previous `step` from the `path` directory and start from that point (unless a
  `step` is passed explicitly).
  [`dvclive.next_step`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/next_step) calls will
  increment the `step`.

- `summary` (`True` by default) - if `True`, upon each
  [`dvclive.next_step`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/next_step) call, DVCLive will
  generate a _metrics summary_ (usable by `dvc metrics`). The _summary_ will be
  located at `{path}.json`.

- `html` (`True` by default) - works only when DVCLive is used alongside DVC. If
  `True`, upon each [`dvclive.next_step`](/doc/dvclive/api-reference/next_step)
  call, DVC will prepare an _html report_ with all the _metrics logs_ logged in
  `path`. The _html report_ will be located at `{path}.html`.

## Exceptions

- `dvclive.error.DvcLiveError` - If the directory `path` can't be created.
