---
name: 'Metrics and Plots'
match: ['metrics', 'plots', 'plot metrics']
tooltip: >-
  DVC [metrics and plots](/doc/user-guide/concepts/metrics-and-plots) provide
  sets of commands to follow the performance of machine learning experiments.
  Mark certain stage outputs as metrics and visualize metrics as plots.
description: >-
  DVC provides sets of commands to track the performance of machine learning
  experiments. Mark certain stage outputs as metrics and visualize metrics as
  plots.
---

<!-- keywords: machine learning metrics, compare data science experiments, machine learning experiment management, track experiment performance, visualize data science experiment diff, plot machine learning metrics, deep learning experiment tracking, track machine learning experiments -->

# Metrics and Plots

<!-- _from plots and metrics intros_ -->

DVC has two concepts for metrics, that represent different results of machine
learning training or data processing:

1. `dvc metrics` represent **scalar numbers** such as AUC, _true positive rate_,
   etc.
2. `dvc plots` can be used to visualize **data series** such as AUC curves, loss
   functions, confusion matrices, etc.

<!-- _from `dvc metrics`_ -->

## Metrics

In order to follow the performance of machine learning experiments, DVC has the
ability to mark a certain stage <abbr>outputs</abbr> as metrics. These metrics
are project-specific floating-point or integer values e.g. AUC, ROC, false
positives, etc.

This type of metrics files are typically generated by user data processing code,
and are tracked using the `-m` (`--metrics`) and `-M` (`--metrics-no-cache`)
options of `dvc run`.

In contrast to `dvc plots`, these metrics should be stored in hierarchical
files.

### Supported file formats

Metrics can be organized as tree hierarchies in JSON or YAML 1.2 files. DVC
addresses specific metrics by the tree path. In the JSON example below, five
metrics are presented: `train.accuracy`, `train.loss`, `train.TN`, `train.FP`
and `time_real`.

```json
{
  "train": {
    "accuracy": 0.9886999726295471,
    "loss": 0.041855331510305405,
    "TN": 473,
    "FP": 845
  },
  "time_real": 344.61309599876404
}
```

DVC itself does not ascribe any specific meaning for these numbers. Usually they
are produced by the model training or model evaluation code and serve as a way
to compare and pick the best performing experiment.

## Plots

<!-- _from `dvc plots` description_ -->

DVC provides a set of commands to visualize certain metrics of machine learning
experiments as plots. Usual plot examples are AUC curves, loss functions,
confusion matrices, among others.

This type of metrics files are created by users, or generated by user data
processing code, and can be defined in `dvc.yaml` (`plots` field) for tracking
(optional).

In contrast to `dvc metrics`, these metrics should be stored as data series.

### Supported file formats

DVC generates plots as HTML files that can be open with a web browser. These
HTML files use [Vega-Lite](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/). Vega is a
declarative grammar for defining plots using JSON. The plots can also be saved
as SVG or PNG image filed from the browser.

Plot metrics can be organized as data series in JSON, YAML 1.2, CSV, or TSV
files. DVC expects to see an array (or multiple arrays) of objects (usually
_float numbers_) in the file.

In tabular file formats such as CSV and TSV, each column is an array.
`dvc plots` subcommands can produce plots for a specified column or a set of
them. For example, `epoch`, `AUC`, and `loss` are the column names below:

```
epoch, AUC, loss
34, 0.91935, 0.0317345
35, 0.91913, 0.0317829
36, 0.92256, 0.0304632
37, 0.92302, 0.0299015
```

In hierarchical file formats (JSON or YAML), an array of consistent objects is
expected: every object should have the same structure.

`dvc plots` subcommands can produce plots for a specified field or a set of
them, from the array's objects. For example, `val_loss` is one of the field
names in the `train` array below:

```
{
  "train": [
    {"val_accuracy": 0.9665, "val_loss": 0.10757},
    {"val_accuracy": 0.9764, "val_loss": 0.07324},
    {"val_accuracy": 0.8770, "val_loss": 0.08136},
    {"val_accuracy": 0.8740, "val_loss": 0.09026},
    {"val_accuracy": 0.8795, "val_loss": 0.07640},
    {"val_accuracy": 0.8803, "val_loss": 0.07608},
    {"val_accuracy": 0.8987, "val_loss": 0.08455}
  ]
}
```

<!-- _probably should mention diff..._ -->
