# stage list

List <abbr>stages</abbr> in the project.

## Synopsis

```usage
usage: dvc stage list [-h] [-q | -v]
                      [-R] [--all] [--fail] [--names-only]
                      [targets ...]

positional arguments:
  targets       Limit command scope to these dvc.yaml files,
                directories (with -R), or stage names.
                './dvc.yaml' by default.
```

> See [`targets`](#options) for more details.

## Description

Prints a summarized list of stages including their names and a one-line
description (which can be omitted using `--names-only`). This command is useful
for discovering or reviewing what stages are present in the project without
having to examine `dvc.yaml` files manually. It can also be a shorter
alternative to `dvc dag`.

Without any `targets`, `dvc stage list` lists the stages from `./dvc.yaml` (in
the current working directory) by default.

The stage description is read from the `desc` field in `dvc.yaml` (truncated to
80 characters) if it exists. Otherwise, DVC generates one with the stage's most
important characteristics (dependencies, outputs, or metrics).

> (ℹ️) DVC uses this command to provide
> [shell tab completion](/doc/install/completion).

## Options

- `targets` (optional command argument) - where to look for stages to list
  (`./dvc.yaml` by default). Examples:

  - `dvc stage list linear/dvc.yaml`: Specific `dvc.yaml` file
  - `dvc stage list -R pipelines/`: Directory to explore recursively for stages
  - `dvc stage list train-model`: Specific stage(s) from `./dvc.yaml`
  - `dvc stage list modeling/dvc.yaml:prepare`: Stage(s) from a specific
    `dvc.yaml` file

- `--names-only` - only lists stage names. Useful for scripting purposes (DVC
  uses it for shell tab completion).

- `-R`, `--recursive` - looks for `dvc.yaml` files to list from in any
  directories given as `targets`, and in their subdirectories. If there are no
  directories among the targets, this option has no effect.

- `--all` - lists all stages from all `dvc.yaml` files in the repo (regardless
  of any given `targets`).

- `--fail` - fails immediately if any target `dvc.yaml` file is invalid. By
  default, those errors are skipped. Only has an effect with `-R` or `--all`.

- `-h`, `--help` - prints the usage/help message, and exit.

- `-q`, `--quiet` - do not write anything to standard output. Exit with 0 if no
  problems arise, otherwise 1.

- `-v`, `--verbose` - displays detailed tracing information.

## Examples:

The base case is to list stages from `./dvc.yaml`:

```dvc
$ dvc stage list
prepare    Outputs data/prepared
featurize  Outputs data/features
train      Outputs model.pkl
evaluate   Reports scores.json, prc.json, roc.json
```

In this case, all of the descriptions were generated by DVC.
