# Configure a Project

You can configure additional settings for your projects, including the project
name, directory, etc. Some of these settings are optional while others may be
mandatory depending on how your Git repository has been set up.

To configure a project's settings , open the 3-dot menu for the project and
click on `Settings`.

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/project_open_settings.png)

## Project name

To change the project name, enter the new name for your project as shown below.

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/project_settings_view_name.png)

## Project directory

If the DVC repo for which you are creating the project is not in the root of
your Git repository but is in a
[sub-directory](/doc/command-reference/init#initializing-dvc-in-subdirectories)
of a [monorepo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monorepo), then
[specify the full path](/doc/studio/user-guide/experiments/configure-a-project#project-directory)
to the sub-directory that contains the DVC repo to which you are trying to
connect.

<admon type="note">

Create multiple projects at once by providing up to 10 comma-separated values
during the initial [create project] flow.

</admon>

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/project_settings_sub_directory.png)

[create project]:
  /doc/studio/user-guide/experiments/create-a-project#create-multiple-projects-from-a-single-git-repository

## Data remotes / cloud storage credentials

Here, the [data remotes](/doc/user-guide/data-management/remote-storage) (cloud
storage or another location outside the Git repo) that are used in your DVC repo
will be listed. If you want your project to include data stored in these data
remotes, you will have to add credentials to grant Iterative Studio access to
the data remotes. Credentials that you have already added to your account are
listed in this section, and you can select them to add them to the project.

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/view_settings_credentials.png)

To add new credentials, click on `Add new credentials` and select the provider
(Amazon S3, GCP, etc.). For details on what types of remote storage (protocols)
are supported, refer to the DVC documentation on [supported storage types].

Depending on the provider, you will be asked for more details such as the
credentials name, username, password etc. Note that for each supported storage
type, the required details may be different.

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/s3_remote_settings_v2.png)

You will also have to ensure that the credentials you enter have the required
permissions on the cloud / remote storage. Refer to the [DVC Remote config
parameters] for more details about this.

Any credentials that you
[add in your profile page](/doc/studio/user-guide/account-and-billing#cloud-credentials)
are also available in your project settings page.

Note that Iterative Studio uses the credentials only to read plots/metrics files
if they are not saved in Git. It does not access any other data in your remote
storage. And you do not need to provide the credentials if any DVC data remote
is not used in your Git repository.

[supported storage types]:
  /doc/user-guide/data-management/remote-storage#supported-storage-types
[dvc remote config parameters]:
  /doc/command-reference/remote/modify#available-parameters-per-storage-type

## Commits and columns

You can specify which Git commits and columns should be imported from your Git
repository to your project in Iterative Studio, and which ones should be
excluded.

### Start date/time

If your Git history has old commits that are not relevant to your project
anymore, you can set a cut-off date so that these outdated commits are not
imported in your project. Your old commits will remain in your Git repository,
but will not over-crowd your projects any more. This will let you focus on
recent experiments, metrics and plots.

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/project_settings_start_date_time.gif)

### Columns

You can specify which columns should be imported from your Git repository to
your project. Any unselected column cannot be displayed in your project table.

![](https://static.iterative.ai/img/studio/project_settings_columns.png)

If you would like to hide imported columns from your project, you can do so in
the project's [Display preferences].

If your project is missing some required columns, then it is likely that
[they have not been imported or are hidden](/doc/studio/user-guide/troubleshooting#project-does-not-contain-the-columns-that-i-want).

<admon type="warn">

The **Columns** setting was earlier called **Tracking scope** or **Mandatory
columns** and behaved slightly differently. Iterative Studio would always import
up to 200 columns. This meant that if you selected only 5 columns, Iterative
Studio would still import another 195 columns, unless your repository did not
have so many columns. This behavior is now obsolete, and only selected columns
are imported.

</admon>

[display preferences]:
  /doc/studio/user-guide/experiments/explore-ml-experiments#columns
